README.md, before:

# Mechanistic Interpretability of Nuclear Mass Models

This repository contains the code used for the interpretability analysis in  
**[*The DNA of Nuclear Models: How AI Predicts Nuclear Masses*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.08370)**.

The goal of this project is to
understand **what the trained neural network learns** when predicting nuclear
binding energies from proton (Z) and neutron (N) numbers, and how this
information is encoded in its internal representations.

---

## Overview

The model learns embeddings for proton number (Z) and neutron number (N) and
uses these embeddings to predict nuclear binding energies. Despite being fully
data-driven, the learned representations exhibit strong low-dimensional
structure, including spiral / helical geometry and hierarchical organization
that mirrors well-known features of nuclear physics.

This repository focuses on:
- Training embedding-based nuclear mass models
- Extracting and analyzing learned representations
- Tracking embedding evolution during training
- Fitting low-dimensional geometric structures (e.g. helices) to embeddings
- Studying how embedding geometry affects physical predictions

---

## Repository structure

```text
NuCLR_DNA/
├── lib/
│   ├── model.py              # Neural network architecture and embeddings
│   ├── utils.py              # Shared utilities
│   └── symbolic_model.py     # Reference symbolic models (BW, WS4, etc.)
├── scripts/
│   ├── exps/                 # Experiment-specific configs
│   ├── multiruns.py          # Launch multiple runs (seeds / configs)
│   ├── pipeline.py           # High-level training + plotting entry point
│   ├── plot.py               # Standalone plotting utilities
│   └── run_pysr.py           # Symbolic regression with PySR
├── notebooks/
│   └── training.ipynb        # Training loop with embedding snapshots
├── experiments/
│   └── <experiment_name>/    # Saved models, PCA snapshots, plots
├── data/
│   └── ...                   # Datasets of nuclear observables
├── data.py                   # Dataset loading & preprocessing
├── train.py                  # Core training loop
├── symbolic_regression.py    # Post-hoc symbolic fits
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

---

## Installation

Install the required Python dependencies with:

    pip install -r requirements.txt

GPU access is recommended for training and large-scale analysis.

---

## Training

The basic implementation of the training procedure used in the paper is provided
as a Jupyter notebook in the `notebooks/` directory. This notebook is intended to
be the most readable and self-contained entry point for understanding the model,
the data, and the training setup.

Models can also be trained using the pipeline script:

    python -m scripts.pipeline --exp <experiment_name> --train

Running the script as a Python module ensures that paths are set correctly and
that the `lib/` directory can be imported. Training outputs are stored in:

    experiments/<experiment_name>/

The `scripts/pipeline.py` interface is a **beta orchestration layer**, primarily
intended for large-scale or automated experiment management. It is not required
to reproduce the core results presented in the paper and may evolve over time.


## Scope and limitations

- This repository is intended for **analysis and reproducibility**, not
  large-scale optimization for mutli-task learning.

---

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite:

@article{Richardson:2025dze,
    author = "Richardson, Kate A. and Trifinopoulos, Sokratis and Williams, Mike",
    title = "{The DNA of nuclear models: How AI predicts nuclear masses}",
    eprint = "2508.08370",
    archivePrefix = "arXiv",
    primaryClass = "nucl-th",
    reportNumber = "CERN-TH-2025-153",
    month = "8",
    year = "2025"
}

Commit message:

Update README with Jaffe factorization details
Added details about Jaffe factorization and fitting examples.

README.md, after:

# Mechanistic Interpretability of Nuclear Mass Models

This repository contains the code used for the interpretability analysis in  
**[*The DNA of Nuclear Models: How AI Predicts Nuclear Masses*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.08370)**.

The goal of this project is to
understand **what the trained neural network learns** when predicting nuclear
binding energies from proton (Z) and neutron (N) numbers, and how this
information is encoded in its internal representations.

---

## Overview

The model learns embeddings for proton number (Z) and neutron number (N) and
uses these embeddings to predict nuclear binding energies. Despite being fully
data-driven, the learned representations exhibit strong low-dimensional
structure, including spiral / helical geometry and hierarchical organization
that mirrors well-known features of nuclear physics.

This repository focuses on:
- Training embedding-based nuclear mass models
- Extracting and analyzing learned representations
- Tracking embedding evolution during training
- Fitting low-dimensional geometric structures (e.g. helices) to embeddings
- Studying how embedding geometry affects physical predictions

We saw in the penultimate layers of this model that it had learned to factorize
microcorrections to the binding energy for discrete value of N and Z. There are 
examples of the different levels of these corrections, which we call Jaffe 
factorization, that we discuss in the paper as well. 

---

## Repository structure

```text
NuCLR_DNA/
├── lib/
│   ├── model.py                  # Neural network architecture and embeddings
│   ├── utils.py                  # Shared utilities
│   └── symbolic_model.py         # Reference symbolic models (BW, WS4, etc.)
├── scripts/
│   ├── exps/                     # Experiment-specific configs
│   ├── multiruns.py              # Launch multiple runs (seeds / configs)
│   ├── pipeline.py               # High-level training + plotting entry point
│   ├── plot.py                   # Standalone plotting utilities
│   └── run_pysr.py               # Symbolic regression with PySR
├── notebooks/
│   └── training.ipynb            # Training loop with embedding snapshots
|   └── fitting_examples.ipynb    # Examples of Jaffe factorization on WS4 and our symbolic model
├── experiments/
│   └── <experiment_name>/        # Saved models, PCA snapshots, plots
├── data/
│   └── ...                       # Datasets of nuclear observables
├── data.py                       # Dataset loading & preprocessing
├── train.py                      # Core training loop
├── symbolic_regression.py        # Post-hoc symbolic fits
├── requirements.txt
└── README.md
```

---

## Installation

Install the required Python dependencies with:

    pip install -r requirements.txt

GPU access is recommended for training and large-scale analysis.

---

## Training

The basic implementation of the training procedure used in the paper is provided
as a Jupyter notebook in the `notebooks/` directory. This notebook is intended to
be the most readable and self-contained entry point for understanding the model,
the data, and the training setup.

Models can also be trained using the pipeline script:

    python -m scripts.pipeline --exp <experiment_name> --train

Running the script as a Python module ensures that paths are set correctly and
that the `lib/` directory can be imported. Training outputs are stored in:

    experiments/<experiment_name>/

The `scripts/pipeline.py` interface is a **beta orchestration layer**, primarily
intended for large-scale or automated experiment management. It is not required
to reproduce the core results presented in the paper and may evolve over time.


## Scope and limitations

- This repository is intended for **analysis and reproducibility**, not
  large-scale optimization for mutli-task learning.

---

## Citation

If you use this code, please cite:

@article{Richardson:2025dze,
    author = "Richardson, Kate A. and Trifinopoulos, Sokratis and Williams, Mike",
    title = "{The DNA of nuclear models: How AI predicts nuclear masses}",
    eprint = "2508.08370",
    archivePrefix = "arXiv",
    primaryClass = "nucl-th",
    reportNumber = "CERN-TH-2025-153",
    month = "8",
    year = "2025"
}
